20 june 2023

it's been a week without reddit now, and i'm not missing it as much as i
thought i might. actually, the only thing i specifically miss is discussion
posts about tv shows and movies. i haven't sought out a replacement, but i
can't think of a forum that has the same density of discussion as the various
show/movie subreddits.

i don't even know if there's been an update on their ridiculous api pricing
scheme. but i used reddit via a third-party mobile app, rif, 99.9% of the
time. i've never tried their official app, but i've heard nothing but bad
things. and i have no interest now that they are doing a hostile march to a
walled garden.

the last time this happened, when ellen pao was made, ceo, i tried jumping to
voat and empeopled.  voat became an alt-right haven and i quickly stopped
visiting it. empeopled was an interesting experiment in a fully self-governing
site. i spent some time on it, but eventually went back to reddit. last i saw,
empeopled is now almost abandonware, and seems to focus on its whole bitcoin
goal instead of fostering communities.

i've been visiting hacker news for several years now. oddly, it has almost
become my "work reddit". i would avoid visiting reddit at work and instead
visit hacker news. i've been visiting slashdot more often the past few months,
even before the whole api debacle. these are good enough for now until i can
find a good replacement for the communities reddit had. stumbleupon's
successor, cloudhiker (formerly stumble), is fine for discovery, but there's
no community.  i've heard kbin and lemmy are decent, growing, alternatives
this time around. and they're federated, which i guess is good. we'll see.

i think this will ultimately kill reddit. i might be wrong. but i'm done with
it.
